By his late 20s, Newgate was a known and infamous pirate, but still not a captain. His strength was infamous enough that he was invited to join the most powerful pirate crew ever, the Rocks Pirates, serving under Captain Rocks D. Xebec. Here, he first met Charlotte Linlin, a future Yonko, recruited another future Yonko into the crew, Kaido, and frequently started arguments with his independence and insubordination. It's during this time that Newgate likely ate the Gura Gura no Mi. By eating one of the strongest Paramecia-type Devil Fruits in existence, Newgate gained the ability to create tremors, letting him cause earthquakes and tsunamis, with it suspected that he could use the fruit's power to destroy the world. After over a decade, the Rocks Pirates met their end during the God Valley Incident, when they were brought down by the united power of Gol D. Roger, his crew, Monkey D. Garp, and the Marines, who all feared the danger Rocks posed.
Following the defeat of the Rocks Pirates, Newgate rechristened himself "Whitebeard", and finally went about building his family in the form of his own pirate crew: the Whitebeard Pirates. Some of the most notable members of this crew throughout its history include Marco the Phoenix, who rose from an Apprentice to Whitebeard's 1st Division Commander, Portgas D. Ace, Whitebeard's 2nd Division commander, the biological son of Gol D. Roger, and the older brother of Monkey D. Luffy, Kozuki Oden, the strongest samurai in Wano's history, and Inurashi and Nekomamushi, the future leaders of Zou. Only bringing men onto his crew, Whitebeard considered all who joined him to be his sons, acting as a stern, but loving father to them all. Together with his sons, Whitebeard eventually clashed with Roger and the Roger Pirates, the once powerless orphan from Sphinx now able to fight evenly with the King of the Pirates for three days before a truce was forged between the two.
Whitebeard's life changed forever following the execution of Roger. With Whitebeard the only man to ever fight evenly with him, he immediately became known as the strongest man in the world. That distinction gained him the status of being one of the Four Emperors of the Sea, alongside Kaido, Big Mom and, later, Shanks — along with a bounty of 5 billion, 46 million berries, the second-highest of all time. The Great Pirate Era began, and thousands of pirates began searching for the ultimate treasure left behind by Roger, the One Piece, but while Whitebeard was always seen as the closest to finding it, he had little interest in doing so for many years. His priority, as always, was simply enjoying time with his family, and it wasn't until he adopted Ace that he hunted for the One Piece in earnest, wishing to crown his newest and most beloved son the new Pirate King. As his crew grew to a massive side, Whitebeard was forced to split it into 16 Divisions, each led by one of his strongest and most trusted sons. During this time, Whitebeard forged a cordial relationship with Shanks, displayed his heroism by claiming Fish-Man Island as his territory, so all who'd seek to attack it would know it was under his protection and, with age, grew severely ill.